Physical description
================
Red pandas can be easily distinguished by its unique ruddy coat color, which acts like camouflage in the canopy of fir trees where branches are covered with clumps of reddish-brown moss and white lichens. Long, coarse guard hairs cover the entire body and there is a soft, dense, woolly undercoat. Their face is predominantly white with reddish brown "tear tracks" extending from the eye to the corner of the mouth. These markings could have evolved to keep the sun out of their eyes. Red pandas have long, bushy tails that help give this arboreal species balance. Their tails are marked with alternating red and buff rings.

Red pandas are the only Asian carnivores to have dense hair covering their feet; the nearest parallel is the polar bear. Red pandas have five toes that are widely separated and semi-retractable claws. In addition to anal glands and urine, they also use scent glands located between their footpads to mark territory. The scent marking glands on the bottom of red pandas' feet exude a colorless liquid, odorless to humans. Red pandas test the odors using the bottom of their tongues, which has a cone-like structure for collecting the liquid and bringing it close to a gland inside their mouths. They are the only carnivores with this adaptation. Their ankles are extremely flexible and rotate when climbing headfirst down a tree trunk. Red pandas climb well, using trees for shelter, to escape predators and sunbathe in the winter.

They have large round heads and short snouts with large pointed ears. They have extremely robust dentition in contrast with other carnivores their size, but they have a simple carnivore stomach despite their predominantly leaf-based diet. They share the giant panda's "thumb:" a modified wrist bone—that is used to help grasp bamboo when feeding.

Red pandas are the only living member of the family Ailuridae, and their taxonomic position has been a subject of much scientific debate. They were first described as belonging to the raccoon family in 1825, and this classification has been controversial ever since. They were placed in the raccoon family (Procyonidae) because of ecological characteristics and morphological similarities of the head, dentition, and ringed tail. Then, due to some agreements in the DNA, they were assigned to the bear family (Ursidae). However, most recent genetic research places red pandas into their own independent family: Ailuridae. Molecular phylogenetic studies show that they are an ancient species in the order Carnivora, superfamily Musteloidea and that they are probably most closely related to the group that includes weasels, raccoons and skunks.

Red pandas are considered by many to be living fossils. They have no close living relatives, and their nearest fossil ancestors, Parailurus, lived three to four million years ago. There may have been as many as three different species of Parailurus, all larger and more robust in the head and jaw, living in Europe and Asia, but possibly crossing the Bering Strait into America. Red pandas may be all that's left—a specialized offshoot surviving the Ice Age in a Chinese mountain refuge.

Adult red pandas weigh between 8.2 and 13.7 pounds (3.7 to 6.2 kilograms) and are 22 to 24.6 inches (56 to 62.5 centimeters) in length plus a tail of 14.6 to 18.6 inches (370 to 472 centimeters) long. Males and females look the same.



Behavior
=======
Red pandas are generally solitary, but there are a couple of exceptions to the rule. First, young red pandas grow relatively slowly, so they develop extended associations with their mothers that last for over a year. Second, red pandas have short relationships during the annual breeding season.

In terms of their ranging patterns, red pandas behave much like larger carnivores. They tend to have overlapping home ranges in which the individuals rarely interact with each other. This may seem odd, since red pandas mostly eat bamboo. However, red pandas search for the most tender bamboo shoots and leaves, and these prime specimens may be patchily distributed — not unlike the prey of larger animals such as jungle cats. In effect, the red panda's habits reduce overcrowding and overuse of shared resources.

The home ranges of female red pandas often measure about one square mile, while males can live in areas twice that size. Male home ranges frequently overlap with at least one female home range and sometimes expand during the breeding season. Because red pandas constantly need to conserve energy, they only cover 650 to 1,000 feet of their home ranges per day and about 25% of their home ranges per month.

Red pandas have several ways of marking their territories and home ranges. These include urine, secretions from anal glands, and scents from glands on the pads of their feet. They have also been known to use communal latrine sites to stake out territory and share information with others. In addition, red pandas often communicate using body language (such as head bobbing and tail arching) and a variety of noises (such as a threatening “huff-quack” and a warning whistle).

They are generally quiet, but at close proximity subtle vocalizations such as squeals, twitters and huff-quacks can be heard. They may also hiss or grunt. Predators include leopards and jackals. To escape predation, red pandas will climb trees or rocks, where they blend in with red lichen and mosses. Young cubs use a whistle, which sounds like a loud scream, to signal distress.

In human care, red pandas can be active anytime of the day but they are primarily crepuscular (most active at dawn and dusk). On average they are awake about 45 percent of the day, and they are more active in cooler weather, especially so during the winter mating season. However, in significantly cold temperatures red pandas can become dormant, lowering their metabolic rate and raising it every few hours to wake up and look for food. This adaptation has allowed them to spend almost as little energy as a sloth, which is exceptionally beneficial considering the low nutrition content of their diet. This species has also adapted behaviors to regulate temperature, such as curling up into a tight ball when it is cold, which serves to conserve body heat and energy expenditure. When temperatures are warm, red pandas will stretch out on a branch and pant to lower their body temperature.
Lifespan

Red pandas may live as long as 22 years. They show symptoms of age at around 12 to 14 years. While females do not breed after age 12, males continue to be reproductively capable.



Reproduction
===========
Red pandas breed from January through March in the Northern Hemisphere. In the Southern Hemisphere, breeding season is June-August. The rapid change in photoperiod (day length) after the winter solstice instigates this breeding season. Mating occurs on the ground, and gestation appears to include a period of delayed implantation which is usually 114 to 145 days, but may be as short as 90 days or as long as 158 days. As reproduction expends a great deal of energy, it is believed that a long gestation period may be due to a slow metabolic rate. Late spring births also coincide with the most tender and digestible bamboo shoots and leaves emerging.

The females create a nest in tree holes, branch forks, tree roots or bamboo thickets and line it with moss, leaves and other soft plant material. A litter of usually two cubs is born sometime between May and July in the northern hemisphere. Newborns weigh between 3.9 and 4.6 ounces (110 to 130 g) and are completely furred to protect them from the cold environment. The offspring stay with the mother for about a year, which is when they normally reach adult size. Young will reach sexual maturity at round 18 months.

In confined conditions, where the male cannot get away from the protective female, aggression can occur between males and females possibly resulting in injury to cubs. In larger enclosures, the male is tolerated but will keep his distance. Once the cubs emerge, most males will interact amicably with them and even play with them. In fact, at certain stages, males will play with the rambunctious cubs more than females. On the other hand, it is usually not possible to keep two adult females together.



Population & Protections
===================
Protecting the red panda goes hand in hand with protecting its habitat. In the past, the dense root systems and undergrowth of Nepal's forests could be relied upon to retain moisture and slow water runoff. Recently, however, logging and other forms of forest degradation have upset this balance and sent rich soil cascading down mountainsides with the annual monsoons. Many Nepalese people count on the red panda's habitat for their survival, and this problem cannot disappear on its own. For example, Langtang National Park in Nepal is considered to be an important area for red pandas, but 30,000 people live near the park and depend on its resources. The reality is that these people are not opposed to change. Rather, they lack viable economic alternatives.

The exact size of Asia's red panda population is currently unknown, but zoos around the world have taken up the call preserve the species. More than 80 zoos currently have red pandas, and almost all of them participate in a management program to ensure the survival of a viable zoo population.

Red pandas have a long gestation period (roughly 135 days) for an animal that weighs only 11 pounds at maturity. They also have small litters, producing about two cubs on average.

Despite the amount of food that red pandas eat, they grow quite slowly, reaching adult size after 12 months. The young become sexually mature at 18 months.

As a result of these characteristics, red pandas have a slow rate of reproduction and have a great deal of difficulty recovering from population declines.



Habitat & Range
=============
Red pandas have a large range that extends from western Nepal to northern Myanmar. The species also lives throughout mountainous areas of southwestern China (Yunnan, Sichuan and Xizang provinces) at elevations between 4,900 and 13,000 feet.

Red pandas only live in temperate forests in the foothills of the Himalayas. The temperature in this region is generally cool, and there is little annual variation. The southern slopes of the mountains trap the water from seasonal monsoons, supporting forests of firs, deciduous hardwoods, and rhododendrons. A bamboo understory grows in these forests and provides the bulk of the red panda's diet. However, these swaths of bamboo are only found in narrow bands throughout the red panda's range. Thus, although red pandas are distributed across thousands of miles of territory, they are restricted to these small, fragile areas because of their dependence on the bamboo plants.



Food/Eating Habits
===============
Unlike the giant panda, which consumes virtually every above-ground part of the bamboo culm (including the woody stem), red pandas selectively feed on the most nutritious leaf tips, and when available, tender shoots. Mechanically, red pandas feed like the giant panda by grasping the stem with their forepaws and shearing selected leaves off with their mouths. They may also forage on the ground for roots, succulent grasses, fallen fruits, insects and grubs and are known to occasionally kill and eat birds and small mammals.

Bamboo constitutes 85 to 95 percent of the red panda's diet. Because red pandas are obligate bamboo eaters, they are on a tight energy budget for much of the year.

At the Zoo, the red pandas eat bamboo throughout the day and variable fruits such as grapes, chopped apple and banana daily, as well as small leaf-eater biscuits.

The red panda's dietary specialization has an profound impact on the animal's daily life. For one thing, bamboo is very high in indigestible fiber, making it extraordinarily difficult for red pandas to extract the nutrients that they need. Cows, horses, and other herbivorous mammals normally have very strong teeth and extra fermentation chambers in their guts. However, while red pandas have large teeth, their guts are not specialized to handle plant matter. In fact, red pandas only extract about one quarter of the nutrients from bamboo, and food passes through their digestive tract quite quickly. That means that many red pandas lose as much as 15 percent of their body weight during the winter, when their other preferred foods (such as insects) are not readily available.

To cope with the lack of food during the winter months, red pandas have evolved several ways of meeting their energy demands. For instance, red pandas can spend as much as 13 hours a day looking for and eating bamboo. They also have a very low metabolic rate (almost as low as sloths), and can slow their metabolism even further in colder temperatures. Finally, their thick fur covers their entire body, including the soles of their feet, allowing them to conserve their body heat.



Trivia
=====
Mozilla Firefox – Popular web browser Mozilla Firefox is named after the red panda and uses the panda's likeness in its logo.




Sources:

http://redpandanetwork.org/
          red_panda/about-the-red-panda
( based on Red Panda: The Fire Cat by Miles Roberts (ZooGoer 21(2), 1992). )

https://nationalzoo.si.edu/
            animals/red-panda
